# Baysian-Sea-Ice

A Bayesian prediction model for summer sea ice extent in the Arctic.

## Description

We add to the existing body of literature attempting to reduce the uncertainty in the timing of a seasonally ice free Arctic by implementing a novel Bayesian statistical modelling approach. Our model accurately predicts outcomes through the 21st century based on only the first 42 data points, corresponding to the observational time interval from 1979--2020. See Henke et al. 2022 for more information.

## Getting Started

### Dependencies

The code for this project is written in Matlab and requires the following toolboxes to be installed:

+ Statistics and Machine Learning Toolbox


### Executing program

Predictions for summer sea ice extent are generated by running obs_predict.m 
Model specifications can be customized by altering the following parameters:

+ To display a plot of predictions, set plotFlag to 1
+ While plotting, show the ensemble of CMIP6 predictions in the background by setting cmipBackground to 1
+ yrsObserved is the interval of years used as observations by the predictive model. To use the observation interval of 1978--2020, leave this section as:
```
yrsObserved=(1:42)';
``` 
+ nsamples, burn, and thin control the number of draws of the MCMC slice sampler, the number of early iterations to throwaway as a burn-in period, and the thinning factor.
+ iF is the multiplicative inflation factor for the priors
+ sigObs is the assumed standard deviation of observations from the long-term sigmoidal trend, in units of millions of sq. km
+ meanObs is the mean offset of the observations with the sigmoidal trend, as empirically determined from CMIP6 model fits.


## Authors

Corresponding author:

Charlotte Dyvik Henke

## Version History

* 0.1
    * Initial Release

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the LICENSE.md file for details

## Acknowledgments
